The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this program is science fantasy. We won't be able to define that
term to everyone's satisfaction. In fact, we won't even try to define it. But we
can provide some elements or qualities that would need to be present in a work
for it to be called science fantasy. Let's consider it first according to the
implications of the term itself, a combination of science and fantasy. For
purposes of delineation, consider first a book of very hard science fiction,
such as Tau Zero or Hal Clement's Mission of Gravity, that include elements of
strict science, extrapolation from well-known physics and astronomy. Yes, Tau
Zero being based on relativity and the time compression and traveling at a very
fast speed. And Mission of Gravity taking place on a planet where there is
varying gravity due to a massive gravity of the planet, but it has a rapid spin
allowing for greater gravitation at the poles, but a lesser gravitation at the
equator. Both books, of course, have fascinating plots to them. They're very
interesting to read. But neither book would work if it weren't for the science
behind them. Both are very hard in their physical sciences. And although some
readers might consider them fantastic, they are really not a part of that genre
known as fantasy. Everything in those books is a strict extrapolation from well
-known physics. On the other end of the scale, we might consider some books that
are truly fantasy books, things like The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien.
This is a strict fantasy. There's no science involved. It's all magic and
sorcery, creatures that are not anything known to humans today. The story is
fantasy in its truest sense. There's no science fiction elements at all. And the
same is in Conan the Barbarian series by Robert E. Howard. The hero is a brash
barbarian who roamed the earth during the Hyborian Age. There's no science to
the book at all. There's some remnants of factual history. But it's mostly just
fantasy. And in between these two extremes, I guess you could call them, the
hard science and the pure fantasy, that's where science fantasy would exist. And
I think we might look at almost the epitome of science fantasy, a book by Roger
Zelazny called Jack of Shadows. And the reason that's a good example of the genre
we're considering on our show today is that it's exactly half science and half
fantasy. The world that Jack lives on, it doesn't rotate. It has one light side
and one dark side. On the dark side, magic works. People have special powers
that are pure wizardry, pure fantasy. But on the light side, the inhabitants
have to go by the rules that we understand, the rules of science. Magic doesn't
work. And by the fact the world does not rotate, these halves never meet. They
never change. Although it's possible for inhabitants of either side to travel to
the other side. This is brought into vivid focus when Jack, a character living
on the dark side, a magical being, travels to the light side in order to find
some information which he has to extract from a computer. When the reader is
reading this jump from the dark side to the light side, it's almost as if he's
reading a different book. The change is so abrupt. Yes, it's an extremely abrupt
transition from the dark side to the light. On the dark side, Zelazny's very
skilled at relating strange creatures, alien environments. And you get used to a
totally fantastic book with creatures you've never seen before, with heroic
actions, with magic. And all of a sudden, you're in a world where computers
work, where Jack has got a job at a university. Now, he's there for a purpose,
as you said, to gain information from the computer. But it's almost like you're
reading a different book when you go from one half of the world to the other.
It's also, I think, the epitome of the attraction of this type of book when Jack
uses some of his magical powers within the scientific background of the light
side. And it's a lot of fun, because all of a sudden you're introducing these
fantastic elements into a logical and orderly scene. This is, I think, the
attraction of the science fantasy for most people. It could be said to be sort
of a wish fulfillment, couldn't it? I'd go along with that. I think it is.
Everybody wants, especially as a child, as you're growing up, you want magic to
work. And at least in some degree, we still retain that wish as we get older.
However, this sort of brings that out. It lets you let magic work in your mind,
at least, for a while. But Jack has a serious quest in that book. He's different
than almost any other... Well, he's different than any other darksider, in that
he's restless. He wants answers to certain questions. And he sets out on a
quest... Well, it happens to be a quest of vengeance. But along the way, he has
it elevated to another level of seriousness, whereby he travels to the center of
the earth and destroys the huge machine which keeps the earth from spinning,
which keeps one half in light and one half in darkness. And his intention in
doing that is to... Well, to destroy the world as it is.
Or it could be to create the world as he thinks it ought to be. Good point.
Because when he stops that machine, what he does is start the world spinning.
And there's a series of light and dark, you know, day and night. And Jack
realizes that what he's done is to blend magic and science. He says that magic
will still belong to the dark, you know, to nighttime. Whereas science will be
in the light. It's sort of symbolic, I guess. Yes. Doesn't Jack have a problem
in determining which is real, the magic or the science, in some part of that
novel? Yeah, he asks one of his friends on the dark side called Morningstar, who
is an amazing giant-like creature, non-human totally. But he's very wise and he
seems to have answers to most things. But Jack asks him which is the correct way
to be, or which is the correct side to live on, which is real? You know, the
light side or the dark side, science or magic? Morningstar simply tells him that
both are correct. It depends on which way you look at it. And I think,
therefore, the book is partly dealing with the two ways of approaching reality.
Zelazny might be saying that you have to have some of both in order to be, well,
I guess to have a balanced view on reality and on life. And in that sense, I
think it's a symbolic book. Zelazny has also written a series of books based on
alternate worlds called The Chronicles of Amber. This is a series of five
novels, at least five so far. They are The Nine Princes in Amber, The Guns of
Avalon, Sign of the Unicorn, The Hand of Oberon, and The Courts of Chaos.
This series is a prime example, I think, of science fantasy. It's a true
adventure story all the way through it. It is one continuous story. The basis of
the idea of the story is that the real world is a world called Amber. And Amber
casts shadows of itself throughout what we would call alternate or parallel
universes. The earth that we live on is but one of these shadow worlds of which
there are an infinite number. This goes all the way until all order is lost and
only chaos remains. This is the opposite end of the spectrum from the real world
of Amber. Amber is ruled by a family, a family of immortals. Oberon is the king,
the father, but he has nine sons and I believe it's four daughters. A great many
sons and daughters. They are all immortal. They all have the blood of Amber in
them. And it's their blood and their power that keeps Amber in existence, along
with this pattern which seems to be the force that keeps order in Amber and
therefore throughout the rest of all these alternate universes. And the trouble
starts when this family, when the father, the King Oberon, suddenly disappears.
And there's a struggle for power among the brothers to see who is going to
become king. I think that Zelazny is very crafty in the way that he leads us
into the story with the main character, Corwin. He is, at the very first of the
series, in the very first book, Nine Princes in Amber, we wake up with Corwin in
a hospital. He doesn't know who he is or what he is or where he is. And he
bluffs his way into knowledge of who he is. And as he learns, we learn. And
begins the story in that manner as he wakes up on earth in a totally normal,
seemingly scientific, sound, logical atmosphere. But in very short order, things
start happening that are totally fantastic. And yet it's kept in balance because
he is on this earth as he begins to leave it and go into the other alternate
worlds. The blend is really well handled, I think. With Zelazny, I think it's
important to realize that no matter what kind of book he writes, there will
always be an element of fantasy in it. He seems to enjoy working in that kind of
field. In one of his most recent works, a novel called Roadmarks, he has people
traveling down what appears to be a freeway. But the exit ramps lead off to
certain places in time and in space that could not possibly be along the road.
Like one exit would be off to Babylon in the 5th century. And then the next exit
would be somewhere in the future in New York. It's a fascinating book following
the travels of one specific character and the outcomes of his travels.
Possibly one of the most eloquent of science fantasy writers is Jack Vance, who
is not known quite as well as some of the other writers, but has written some
fabulous science fantasy stories. His classic book, I think, in the field of
science fantasy is called The Dying Earth. Published in 1950, although he was
writing it through the mid-40s. For a number of years, it existed more or less
as an underground book, as it's called. Meaning it was read mostly by people who
were well into the field and understood most of the authors who were writing.
But in the last few years, Vance has gained a tremendous reputation. But The
Dying Earth is a collection of stories. And Vance has used a particular
environment for his stories in that book. He conceives of the Earth as the title
indicates, dying. The sun is a red star which is almost out. It's barely giving
out any warmth. The Earth is millions of years in the future. The mountains are
worn down. It's a very softened environment. The forests are old, decrepit.
There are only probably a few thousand people on the Earth. And they know that
their time is approaching, you know, where their lives and their Earth is going
to end. But the interesting part of that is that science is dead. Science has
not been around for perhaps millions of years. Magic works. And the people who
are left on Earth are mostly magicians. They have spells. They have tremendous
powers that they use to either fight each other or get what they want, whatever.
And Vance has written about six or seven stories around this particular, in this
particular environment. And I might mention just a couple of the stories to
illustrate why this could be called science fantasy. In one of the first stories
in the book, there's a magician called Pandelume who knows almost all of the
spells, who is a genius at magic. He's admired by almost everybody who exists on
Earth. And he is studying a brand new field that he's just discovered. And he's
fascinated with it. And he says the whole underpinning of the universe is based
upon this field. And it's called mathematics, which is kind of interesting,
because here are magicians looking back and rediscovering a science which has
not been around for millions of years. In another story, Ulan-Dhor, there's the
ruins of an ancient city which one of the magicians discovers. And it's full of
these metallic vehicles, which we would recognize as cars or some kind of device
of transportation. He's fascinated with them, learns how to use them. Again, a
reference to the past, to the fact that science did once exist. And in the last
story in the volume, perhaps one of the major ones, called Guyal of Sfere. Guyal
is a hero, a magician, but a hero nonetheless, who believes that magic is
limited. He gets tired of it. He goes off on a quest to reach what is called the
Museum of Man, which is supposed to contain all of the knowledge of the human
race. He finds the museum, and after a number of difficulties, he learns that
far in the past, Earthman had the capacity to space travel, to leave the planet
and go to other places. And since Earth is dying, since it's not going to last
that much longer, and since magic seems to be a dead end, he decides to take up
science and see if he can do something about getting people back off the Earth.
So it's sort of an interesting approach to science fantasy. And one would have
to read Vance to really appreciate the man's style, the beauty of his language,
the brilliance of the way he describes things. It's almost amazing that in just
a few words he can paint such a vivid visual picture. In the story Liane the
Wanderer, Liane is a sort of vagabond. He is enticed by a girl into going and
trying to steal a tapestry, which is guarded by Chun the Unavoidable. And when
Liane creeps up upon where the tapestry is hung and jerks it aside, Chun is
hiding behind it, and Liane runs off. He's a very swift, almost blindingly swift
person. And he runs away from him, but Chun is following him right on his heels.
And Liane uses some magic, a magical hoop, which allows him to become invisible.
And he steps through it and vanishes. And he's standing there thinking he's
hiding. And all of a sudden, a voice from behind him says, I am Chun the
Unavoidable. And then the scene shifts back to the girl, who has just received
two long threads from the tapestry. And a message from Chun, who said he's
sending her these two long threads because of the two beautiful, large, golden
eyes he's added to his cloak. That kind of summary, I don't think, can really
convey to people the alienness that Jack Vance can communicate in his writing.
Barry Malzberg, noted critic and author, both of science fiction, has made
the statement that Jack Vance is the greatest portrayer of total alienness in
science fiction. And I quote, He is simply one of the best there ever has been
at grasping that the material of science fiction will feel differently to those
who live through it, and has brought that difference alive. And Malzberg also
feels that Jack Vance is one of the ten most important writers in the history of
the field. It's a shame that he's not better known, but he's a very private
person. He hasn't publicized himself. He hasn't gone out of his way to drum
interest in his work. But he has won both Hugos and Nebulas. One of his Hugos
came in 1962 for the story The Dragon Masters, which would also qualify as an
excellent example of science fantasy.
Basically, and briefly, the plot takes place on a world called Aerlith. It's a
very bleak world in an unknown corner of the universe. But it once was part of
the human empire. It's been cut off now because space travel has been forgotten.
And the people on this world have, I guess, degenerated into a sort of a Middle
Ages type existence. They live in castles. They breed animals. They exist on
agriculture. They have sort of a feudal existence. But the animal that they
breed mostly is dragons. And they breed all sizes of dragons. Dragons to fight
with. Dragons to ride. Dragons to cultivate with. A fascinating society that
advances built up. And the conflict occurs when a group of mutated humans come
to the world and try to take off the men who are here as slaves. And a war
occurs between this dragon culture and between these men, these mutated men who
have space weapons. A very interesting book. And again, in the style advances,
is famous for. Another author, Anne McCaffrey, has written some books dealing
with dragons. In fact, there are six of them in total. The books are grouped
into two trilogies. One, The Dragonriders of Pern. And the other, a trilogy on
the Harper Hall of Pern. Through the different books, you find out that early in
Pern's history, or at least when mankind had been on Pern, they had to
genetically alter some of the native life form, which was a small dragon-like
creature, not much bigger than a small bird. They had to genetically alter the
small dragons and make them into much larger dragons, those familiar from human
mythology. In order to fight an invading alien spore from what they call the Red
Star, it's actually a planet orbiting outside the orbit of Pern. The three books
in the Dragon Riders of Pern series are Dragonflight, Dragonquest, and The White
Dragon. And it follows the adventures of several of the main characters in the
series, that being F'lar, who is the leader of Benden Weyr, which is an enclave
of dragons, and F'nor, his brother, and Lessa, who is the Weyr woman, are
really the driving force behind Benden Weyr. The first book, Dragonflight, is
based around the adventures of those three characters. And it picks up again in
Dragonquest, and then goes on to White Dragon, which was a nationwide
bestseller. And it revolves around the adventures of Jaxom and his dragon,
named Ruth, and their adventures at Bendan Weyr, and again in another part of
the planet. One of the most interesting aspects of the novels is the bond
between the dragons and their riders. This bond is formed when the dragons are
born, and goes with them throughout both of their lives. At first, Jaxom has
to be careful how he uses Ruth, the dragon he bonds himself with, because he's a
young lord, and he's due to take over one of the holes, or one of the, almost
like a feudal manor,
an organizational structure on the planet. But he's not yet ready for that, and
he's not supposed to have a dragon of his own. But he does bond himself to Ruth,
and he and Ruth become extremely close. And we find out that the dragons are
highly intelligent. They communicate telepathically with their human, I guess
you'd call them mates, or bonders, if you want to call them that. And Jaxom
teaches Ruth various things. He trains Ruth to do what these dragons have been
bred to do, which is to fight the Thread. Nobody knows this yet, because Ruth is
different. He is smaller, and he's white. But he does have special powers. And
as it turns out, it's a fortunate thing that Jaxom did train Ruth, and that he
did bond himself to him, because there's a tremendous threat that comes from
various places, but mostly with the Threads. Jaxom and Ruth are equipped to
handle it. And in fighting the Threads, it almost becomes a heroic task for
Jaxom. He saves the men of Pern. Yes, it's really an unusual incident that
Ruth was allowed to live. He wasn't really hatching out of his shell, but
Jaxom leaped into the pit where the hatching was taking place and broke the
shell and let him out. Her other trilogy revolves around the Harper Hall, or the
minstrels of Pern, which go about singing songs which carry about various
information and are used as teaching tools. And these stories revolve around
Robinton, the master Harper of Pern, or the leader of the minstrels, and Menolly,
his female apprentice, who's the first girl in the Harper Hall. In all those
books, I think McCaffrey has shown a tremendous talent at developing an entire
world. You know, by the time you finish the Pern books, you feel that you've
been in a different place, you know, very different from Earth, totally
believable. And that skill, I think, is reflected in the fact that she's won
both a Hugo and a Nebula back in 1967 and 68. And she was the first woman,
science fiction writer, to win both of those awards.
Another entirely different way almost of looking at science fantasy would be to
simply consider the feeling or mood of a work. Is there an atmosphere, for
instance, of melodrama? Is the conflict basic good versus evil with a totally
black villain and a shining too-good-to-be-true hero? When you sense these
qualities in a work, you probably have something that can be termed science
fantasy. What about Superman, for instance? Is he a science fiction character or
is he science fantasy? It's easy to see him as science fiction, I think. After
all, he's an alien from another planet, and the special powers that he has are
simply due to the fact he's here on Earth, and his being, his metabolism, his
alien structure allows him to fly and to perform superhuman feats, but on his
own planet he couldn't do those things. So we could look at that book simply as
a book about an alien on Earth and call it a science fiction book. But since it
really doesn't have any scientific basis behind his powers or the abilities
which he acquires simply by being under a different type of sun, which really
doesn't have any drastic difference in radiation between the red giant star
which he was under and the yellow G-type star of Earth, there really isn't any
scientific basis to his powers. I would say he's a fantasy character. I would
say he's a fantasy character too, but I would think it would be more based on
the fact that he's a larger-than-life hero. He's not really an alien in the
sense that we've come to know them in science fiction such as works by Larry
Niven or by Hal Clement. It's really a human character, and he's there as a
hero. That's his whole purpose. It's a melodrama in many ways. It's very, very
good against very, very evil. It's really, in that sense, a fantasy creature.
What about Star Wars? Most people, I would think, would consider that to be a
science fiction movie. It has spaceships, it has ray guns, all sorts of
fantastic technologically looking devices. But it's really been put forward as a
science fantasy. I mean, once again, you have a larger-than-life hero, our
heroes, one of the ultimate bad guys ever created by the cinema, Darth Vader.
And the science in it is really in the background. They have no real hard
scientific explanation for the items, the scientific gadgets that they have.
They simply turn them on, and they work. That's an element of science fantasy. I
think this gets us into the specific problems that you have when you're trying
to define science fantasy. Technically speaking, in Star Wars, there's nothing
there that cannot be explained by extrapolation of current known physics and
science. There's just nothing there that is really a fantasy, like, say, magic.
It's all science fiction. However, the story itself is flowing with fantasy
elements in terms of style and the way it's formatted, as almost a melodrama or
a western or a soap opera in space. It's also an intentional blend of styles in
things like, for instance, the lightsabers. The technology of science fiction is
used there to create a saber that uses some sort of force field. And yet you're
still dealing with the stylistic element of a sword fight, which gets you back
into the fantasy realm. So it's an interesting blend of science fiction elements
with a fantasy style. And this, too, I think, should be termed science fantasy.
One other series of books that might be mentioned in this same stylistic
category is another series of works by Jack Vance, known as the Tschai series,
Planet of Adventure, written between 1968 and 1970. Yeah, that book has almost a
pure science fiction beginning. A scout ship is wrecked on another planet, and
it looks like it's going to be a straight science fiction adventure. But very
quickly you learn that this planet Tschai really has no science to it. It becomes
almost a sword and sorcery book, although the sorcery part is downplayed. It
becomes mostly sword fights, adventure quests, saving maidens, etc., etc., by
the hero, Adam Reith, who is a full-blown hero, much in the way that Superman or
Luke Skywalker would be. And I think we have to mention some other names of
authors who've written science fantasy. L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt,
for instance, collaborated on a series of books. Leigh Brackett
wrote a series, in fact a trilogy of books based around a character, Eric
John Stark. Even Robert Heinlein, who most people would call a fairly classic
science fiction writer, tried his hand at one science fantasy novel, Glory Road,
back in 1963, which isn't bad. And you have Poul Anderson, of course, who wrote
things like The High Crusade and Three Hearts and Three Lions that would be
science fantasy. And probably one of the
most recent entries, or one of the most recent authors in the science fantasy
field is Jack Chalker, who's been writing a series of novels called The Well
World novels, with their protagonist Nathan Brazil.
And also Philip Jose Farmer, who wrote his Riverworld series in
1971, which has many aspects of science fantasy in it.
I think everyone enjoys a rousing adventure tale, especially when
it includes magic, sword fights, unicorns, dragons, and other such fantastic
fare. When a fantasy adventure like that is combined with the more believable
elements of science fiction, the blend is somehow especially attractive. The
worlds of science fantasy are quite unlimited, and hopefully will continue to
make their appearance on the science fiction bookcase.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM, and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.